the shadow of the past 73You ought to begin to understand, Frodo, after all youhave heard, said Gandalf. He hated it and loved it, as hehated and loved himself. He could not get rid of it. He hadno will left in the matter.A Ring of Power looks after itself, Frodo. It may slip offtreacherously, but its keeper never abandons it. At most heplays with the idea of handing it on to someone elses care and that only at an early stage, when it rst begins to grip.But as far as I know Bilbo alone in history has ever gonebeyond playing, and really done it. He needed all my help,too. And even so he would never have just forsaken it, or castit aside. It was not Gollum, Frodo, but the Ring itself thatdecided things. The Ring left him.What, just in time to meet Bilbo? said Frodo. Wouldntan Orc have suited it better?It is no laughing matter, said Gandalf. Not for you. Itwas the strangest event in the whole history of the Ring sofar: Bilbos arrival just at that time, and putting his hand onit, blindly, in the dark.There was more than one power at work, Frodo. TheRing was trying to get back to its master. It had slipped fromIsildurs hand and betrayed him; then when a chance cameit caught poor Deagol, and he was murdered; and after thatGollum, and it had devoured him. It could make no furtheruse of him: he was too small and mean; and as long as itstayed with him he would never leave his deep pool again.So now, when its master was awake once more and sendingout his dark thought from Mirkwood, it abandoned Gollum.Only to be picked up by the most unlikely person imaginable:Bilbo from the Shire!Behind that there was something else at work, beyond anydesign of the Ring-maker. I can put it no plainer than bysaying that Bilbo was meant to nd the Ring, and not by itsmaker. In which case you also were meant to have it. Andthat may be an encouraging thought.It is not, said Frodo. Though I am not sure that I under-stand you. But how have you learned all this about the Ring,74 the fellowship of the ringand about Gollum? Do you really know it all, or are you justguessing still?Gandalf looked at Frodo, and his eyes glinted. I knewmuch and I have learned much, he answered. But I am notgoing to give an account of all my doings to you. The historyof Elendil and Isildur and the One Ring is known to all theWise. Your ring is shown to be that One Ring by the re-writing alone, apart from any other evidence.And when did you discover that? asked Frodo, inter-rupting.Just now in this room, of course, answered the wizardsharply. But I expected to nd it. I have come back fromdark journeys and long search to make that nal test. It is thelast proof, and all is now only too clear. Making out Gollumspart, and tting it into the gap in the history, required somethought. I may have started with guesses about Gollum, butI am not guessing now. I know. I have seen him.You have seen Gollum? exclaimed Frodo in amazement.Yes. The obvious thing to do, of course, if one could. Itried long ago; but I have managed it at last.Then what happened after Bilbo escaped from him? Doyou know that?Not so clearly. What I have told you is what Gollum waswilling to tell  though not, of course, in the way I havereported it. Gollum is a liar, and you have to sift his words.For instance, he called the Ring his birthday-present, andhe stuck to that. He said it came from his grandmother, whohad lots of beautiful things of that kind. A ridiculous story. Ihave no doubt that Smeagols grandmother was a matriarch,a great person in her way, but to talk of her possessing manyElven-rings was absurd, and as for giving them away, it wasa lie. But a lie with a grain of truth.The murder of Deagol haunted Gollum, and he had madeup a defence, repeating it to his Precious over and overagain, as he gnawed bones in the dark, until he almostbelieved it. It was his birthday. Deagol ought to have giventhe ring to him. It had obviously turned up just so as to bethe shadow of the past 75a present. It was his birthday-present, and so on, and on.I endured him as long as I could, but the truth was desper-ately important, and in the end I had to be harsh. I put thefear of re on him, and wrung the true story out of him, bit bybit, together with much snivelling and snarling. He thought hewas misunderstood and ill-used. But when he had at last toldme his history, as far as the end of the Riddle-game andBilbos escape, he would not say any more, except in darkhints. Some other fear was on him greater than mine. Hemuttered that he was going to get his own back. People wouldsee if he would stand being kicked, and driven into a holeand then robbed. Gollum had good friends now, good friendsand very strong. They would help him. Baggins would payfor it. That was his chief thought. He hated Bilbo and cursedhis name. What is more, he knew where he came from.But how did he nd that out? asked Frodo.Well, as for the name, Bilbo very foolishly told Gollumhimself; and after that it would not be difcult to discoverhis country, once Gollum came out. Oh yes, he came out.His longing for the Ring proved stronger than his fear ofthe Orcs, or even of the light. After a year or two he left themountains. You see, though still bound by desire of it, theRing was no longer devouring him; he began to revive a little.He felt old, terribly old, yet less timid, and he was mortallyhungry.Light, light of Sun and Moon, he still feared and hated,and he always will, I think; but he was cunning. He found hecould hide from daylight and moonshine, and make his wayswiftly and softly by dead of night with his pale cold eyes,and catch small frightened or unwary things. He grewstronger and bolder with new food and new air. He foundhis way into Mirkwood, as one would expect.Is that where you found him? asked Frodo.I saw him there, answered Gandalf, but before that hehad wandered far, following Bilbos trail. It was difcult tolearn anything from him for certain, for his talk was con-stantly interrupted by curses and threats. What had it got76 the fellowship of the ringin its pocketses? he said. It wouldnt say, no precious. Littlecheat. Not a fair question. It cheated rst, it did. It broke therules. We ought to have squeezed it, yes precious. And wewill, precious!That is a sample of his talk. I dont suppose you want anymore. I had weary days of it. But from hints dropped amongthe snarls I gathered that his padding feet had taken him atlast to Esgaroth, and even to the streets of Dale, listeningsecretly and peering. Well, the news of the great events wentfar and wide in Wilderland, and many had heard Bilbosname and knew where he came from. We had made no secretof our return journey to his home in the West. Gollumssharp ears would soon learn what he wanted.Then why didnt he track Bilbo further? asked Frodo.Why didnt he come to the Shire?Ah, said Gandalf, now we come to it. I think Gollumtried to. He set out and came back westward, as far as theGreat River. But then he turned aside. He was not dauntedby the distance, I am sure. No, something else drew himaway. So my friends think, those that hunted him for me.The Wood-elves tracked him rst, an easy task for them,for his trail was still fresh then. Through Mirkwood and backagain it led them, though they never caught him. The woodwas full of the rumour of him, dreadful tales even amongbeasts and birds. The Woodmen said that there was somenew terror abroad, a ghost that drank blood. It climbed treesto nd nests; it crept into holes to nd the young; it slippedthrough windows to nd cradles.But at the western edge of Mirkwood the trail turnedaway. It wandered off southwards and passed out of theWood-elves ken, and was lost. And then I made a greatmistake. Yes, Frodo, and not the rst; though I fear it mayprove the worst. I let the matter be. I let him go; for I hadmuch else to think of at that time, and I still trusted the loreof Saruman.Well, that was years ago. I have paid for it since with manydark and dangerous days. The trail was long cold when Ithe shadow of the past 77took it up again, after Bilbo left here. And my search wouldhave been in vain, but for the help that I had from a friend:Aragorn, the greatest traveller and huntsman of this age ofthe world. Together we sought for Gollum down the wholelength of Wilderland, without hope, and without success. Butat last, when I had given up the chase and turned to otherpaths, Gollum was found. My friend returned out of greatperils bringing the miserable creature with him.What he had been doing he would not say. He only weptand called us cruel, with many a gollum in his throat; andwhen we pressed him he whined and cringed, and rubbedhis long hands, licking his ngers as if they pained him, as ifhe remembered some old torture. But I am afraid there is nopossible doubt: he had made his slow, sneaking way, step bystep, mile by mile, south, down at last to the Land of Mordor.A heavy silence fell in the room. Frodo could hear his heartbeating. Even outside everything seemed still. No sound ofSams shears could now be heard.Yes, to Mordor, said Gandalf. Alas! Mordor draws allwicked things, and the Dark Power was bending all its will togather them there. The Ring of the Enemy would leave itsmark, too, leave him open to the summons. And all folk werewhispering then of the new Shadow in the South, and itshatred of the West. There were his ne new friends, whowould help him in his revenge!Wretched fool! In that land he would learn much, toomuch for his comfort. And sooner or later as he lurked andpried on the borders he would be caught, and taken  forexamination. That was the way of it, I fear. When he wasfound he had already been there long, and was on his wayback. On some errand of mischief. But that does not mattermuch now. His worst mischief was done.Yes, alas! through him the Enemy has learned that theOne has been found again. He knows where Isildur fell. Heknows where Gollum found his ring. He knows that it is aGreat Ring, for it gave long life. He knows that it is not one78 the fellowship of the ringof the Three, for they have never been lost, and they endureno evil. He knows that it is not one of the Seven, or the Nine,for they are accounted for. He knows that it is the One. Andhe has at last heard, I think, of hobbits and the Shire.The Shire  he may be seeking for it now, if he has notalready found out where it lies. Indeed, Frodo, I fear that hemay even think that the long-unnoticed name of Baggins hasbecome important.But this is terrible! cried Frodo. Far worse than the worstthat I imagined from your hints and warnings. O Gandalf,best of friends, what am I to do? For now I am really afraid.What am I to do? What a pity that Bilbo did not stab thatvile creature, when he had a chance!Pity? It was Pity that stayed his hand. Pity, and Mercy:not to strike without need. And he has been well rewarded,Frodo. Be sure that he took so little hurt from the evil, andescaped in the end, because he began his ownership of theRing so. With Pity.I am sorry, said Frodo. But I am frightened; and I do notfeel any pity for Gollum.You have not seen him, Gandalf broke in.No, and I dont want to, said Frodo. I cant understandyou. Do you mean to say that you, and the Elves, have lethim live on after all those horrible deeds? Now at any rate heis as bad as an Orc, and just an enemy. He deserves death.Deserves it! I daresay he does. Many that live deservedeath. And some that die deserve life. Can you give it tothem? Then do not be too eager to deal out death in judge-ment. For even the very wise cannot see all ends. I have notmuch hope that Gollum can be cured before he dies, butthere is a chance of it. And he is bound up with the fate ofthe Ring. My heart tells me that he has some part to play yet,for good or ill, before the end; and when that comes, the pityof Bilbo may rule the fate of many  yours not least. In anycase we did not kill him: he is very old and very wretched.The Wood-elves have him in prison, but they treat him withsuch kindness as they can nd in their wise hearts.the shadow of the past 79All the same, said Frodo, even if Bilbo could not killGollum, I wish he had not kept the Ring. I wish he had neverfound it, and that I had not got it! Why did you let me keepit? Why didnt you make me throw it away, or, or destroy it?Let you? Make you? said the wizard. Havent you beenlistening to all that I have said? You are not thinking of whatyou are saying. But as for throwing it away, that was obviouslywrong. These Rings have a way of being found. In evil handsit might have done great evil. Worst of all, it might have falleninto the hands of the Enemy. Indeed it certainly would; forthis is the One, and he is exerting all his power to nd it ordraw it to himself.Of course, my dear Frodo, it was dangerous for you; andthat has troubled me deeply. But there was so much at stakethat I had to take some risk  though even when I was faraway there has never been a day when the Shire has not beenguarded by watchful eyes. As long as you never used it, I didnot think that the Ring would have any lasting effect onyou, not for evil, not at any rate for a very long time. Andyou must remember that nine years ago, when I last saw you,I still knew little for certain.But why not destroy it, as you say should have been donelong ago? cried Frodo again. If you had warned me, or evensent me a message, I would have done away with it.Would you? How would you do that? Have you ever tried?No. But I suppose one could hammer it or melt it.Try! said Gandalf. Try now!Frodo drew the Ring out of his pocket again and looked atit. It now appeared plain and smooth, without mark or devicethat he could see. The gold looked very fair and pure, andFrodo thought how rich and beautiful was its colour, howperfect was its roundness. It was an admirable thing andaltogether precious. When he took it out he had intended toing it from him into the very hottest part of the re. But hefound now that he could not do so, not without a greatstruggle. He weighed the Ring in his hand, hesitating, and80 the fellowship of the ringforcing himself to remember all that Gandalf had told him;and then with an effort of will he made a movement, as if tocast it away  but he found that he had put it back in hispocket.Gandalf laughed grimly. You see? Already you too, Frodo,cannot easily let it go, nor will to damage it. And I could notmake you  except by force, which would break your mind.But as for breaking the Ring, force is useless. Even if youtook it and struck it with a heavy sledge-hammer, it wouldmake no dint in it. It cannot be unmade by your hands, orby mine.Your small re, of course, would not melt even ordinarygold. This Ring has already passed through it unscathed, andeven unheated. But there is no smiths forge in this Shire thatcould change it at all. Not even the anvils and furnaces of theDwarves could do that. It has been said that dragon-re couldmelt and consume the Rings of Power, but there is not nowany dragon left on earth in which the old re is hot enough;nor was there ever any dragon, not even Ancalagon the Black,who could have harmed the One Ring, the Ruling Ring, forthat was made by Sauron himself.There is only one way: to nd the Cracks of Doom in thedepths of Orodruin, the Fire-mountain, and cast the Ring inthere, if you really wish to destroy it, to put it beyond thegrasp of the Enemy for ever.I do really wish to destroy it! cried Frodo. Or, well, tohave it destroyed. I am not made for perilous quests. I wishI had never seen the Ring! Why did it come to me? Whywas I chosen?Such questions cannot be answered, said Gandalf. Youmay be sure that it was not for any merit that others do notpossess: not for power or wisdom, at any rate. But you havebeen chosen, and you must therefore use such strength andheart and wits as you have.But I have so little of any of these things! You are wiseand powerful. Will you not take the Ring?No! cried Gandalf, springing to his feet. With that power86 the fellowship of the ringanxious. In the meanwhile, do take care, and dont let outany hint of where you are going! And see that Sam Gamgeedoes not talk. If he does, I really shall turn him into a toad.As for where I am going, said Frodo, it would be difcultto give that away, for I have no clear idea myself, yet.Dont be absurd! said Gandalf. I am not warning youagainst leaving an address at the post-ofce! But you areleaving the Shire  and that should not be known, until youare far away. And you must go, or at least set out, eitherNorth, South, West or East  and the direction should cer-tainly not be known.I have been so taken up with the thoughts of leaving BagEnd, and of saying farewell, that I have never even consideredthe direction, said Frodo. For where am I to go? And bywhat shall I steer? What is to be my quest? Bilbo went to nda treasure, there and back again; but I go to lose one, and notreturn, as far as I can see.But you cannot see very far, said Gandalf. Neither canI. It may be your task to nd the Cracks of Doom; but thatquest may be for others: I do not know. At any rate you arenot ready for that long road yet.No indeed! said Frodo. But in the meantime what courseam I to take?Towards danger; but not too rashly, nor too straight,answered the wizard. If you want my advice, make forRivendell. That journey should not prove too perilous,though the Road is less easy than it was, and it will growworse as the year fails.Rivendell! said Frodo. Very good: I will go east, and Iwill make for Rivendell. I will take Sam to visit the Elves; hewill be delighted. He spoke lightly; but his heart was movedsuddenly with a desire to see the house of Elrond Halfelven,and breathe the air of that deep valley where many of theFair Folk still dwelt in peace.One summers evening an astonishing piece of newsreached the Ivy Bush and Green Dragon. Giants and otherthree is company 87portents on the borders of the Shire were forgotten for moreimportant matters: Mr. Frodo was selling Bag End, indeedhe had already sold it  to the Sackville-Bagginses!For a nice bit, too, said some. At a bargain price, saidothers, and thats more likely when Mistress Lobelias thebuyer. (Otho had died some years before, at the ripe butdisappointed age of 102.)Just why Mr. Frodo was selling his beautiful hole was evenmore debatable than the price. A few held the theory  sup-ported by the nods and hints of Mr. Baggins himself  thatFrodos money was running out: he was going to leaveHobbiton and live in a quiet way on the proceeds of the saledown in Buckland among his Brandybuck relations. As farfrom the Sackville-Bagginses as may be, some added. But sormly xed had the notion of the immeasurable wealth of theBagginses of Bag End become that most found this hard tobelieve, harder than any other reason or unreason that theirfancy could suggest: to most it suggested a dark and yetunrevealed plot by Gandalf. Though he kept himself veryquiet and did not go about by day, it was well known that hewas hiding up in the Bag End. But however a removal mightt in with the designs of his wizardry, there was no doubtabout the fact: Frodo Baggins was going back to Buckland.Yes, I shall be moving this autumn, he said. MerryBrandybuck is looking out for a nice little hole for me, orperhaps a small house.As a matter of fact with Merrys help he had already chosenand bought a little house at Crickhollow in the countrybeyond Bucklebury. To all but Sam he pretended he wasgoing to settle down there permanently. The decision to setout eastwards had suggested the idea to him; for Bucklandwas on the eastern borders of the Shire, and as he had livedthere in childhood his going back would at least seemcredible.Gandalf stayed in the Shire for over two months. Then oneevening, at the end of June, soon after Frodos plan had been88 the fellowship of the ringnally arranged, he suddenly announced that he was goingoff again next morning. Only for a short while, I hope, hesaid. But I am going down beyond the southern borders toget some news, if I can. I have been idle longer than I should.He spoke lightly, but it seemed to Frodo that he lookedrather worried. Has anything happened? he asked.Well no; but I have heard something that has made meanxious and needs looking into. If I think it necessary afterall for you to get off at once, I shall come back immediately,or at least send word. In the meanwhile stick to your plan;but be more careful than ever, especially of the Ring. Let meimpress on you once more: dont use it! He went off at dawn. I may be back any day, he said. Atthe very latest I shall come back for the farewell party. I thinkafter all you may need my company on the Road.At rst Frodo was a good deal disturbed, and wonderedoften what Gandalf could have heard; but his uneasinesswore off, and in the ne weather he forgot his troubles for awhile. The Shire had seldom seen so fair a summer, or sorich an autumn: the trees were laden with apples, honey wasdripping in the combs, and the corn was tall and full.Autumn was well under way before Frodo began to worryabout Gandalf again. September was passing and there wasstill no news of him. The Birthday, and the removal, drewnearer, and still he did not come, or send word. Bag Endbegan to be busy. Some of Frodos friends came to stay andhelp him with the packing: there was Fredegar Bolger andFolco Bofn, and of course his special friends Pippin Tookand Merry Brandybuck. Between them they turned the wholeplace upside-down.On September 20th two covered carts went off laden toBuckland, conveying the furniture and goods that Frodo hadnot sold to his new home, by way of the BrandywineBridge.The next day Frodo became really anxious, and kepta constant look-out for Gandalf. Thursday, his birthdaymorning, dawned as fair and clear as it had long ago forBilbos great party. Still Gandalf did not appear. In thethree is company 89evening Frodo gave his farewell feast: it was quite small, justa dinner for himself and his four helpers; but he was troubledand felt in no mood for it. The thought that he would sosoon have to part with his young friends weighed on his heart.He wondered how he would break it to them.The four younger hobbits were, however, in high spirits,and the party soon became very cheerful in spite of Gandalf sabsence. The dining-room was bare except for a table andchairs, but the food was good, and there was good wine:Frodos wine had not been included in the sale to theSackville-Bagginses.Whatever happens to the rest of my stuff, when the S.-B.sget their claws on it, at any rate I have found a good homefor this! said Frodo, as he drained his glass. It was the lastdrop of Old Winyards.When they had sung many songs, and talked of manythings they had done together, they toasted Bilbos birthday,and they drank his health and Frodos together according toFrodos custom. Then they went out for a sniff of air, andglimpse of the stars, and then they went to bed. Frodos partywas over, and Gandalf had not come.The next morning they were busy packing another cartwith the remainder of the luggage. Merry took charge of this,and drove off with Fatty (that is Fredegar Bolger). Someonemust get there and warm the house before you arrive, saidMerry. Well, see you later  the day after tomorrow, if youdont go to sleep on the way!Folco went home after lunch, but Pippin remained behind.Frodo was restless and anxious, listening in vain for a soundof Gandalf. He decided to wait until nightfall. After that, ifGandalf wanted him urgently, he would go to Crickhollow,and might even get there rst. For Frodo was going on foot.His plan  for pleasure and a last look at the Shire as much asany other reason  was to walk from Hobbiton to BuckleburyFerry, taking it fairly easy.I shall get myself a bit into training, too, he said, looking90 the fellowship of the ringat himself in a dusty mirror in the half-empty hall. He hadnot done any strenuous walking for a long time, and thereection looked rather abby, he thought.After lunch, the Sackville-Bagginses, Lobelia and hersandy-haired son, Lotho, turned up, much to Frodos annoy-ance. Ours at last! said Lobelia, as she stepped inside. It wasnot polite; nor strictly true, for the sale of Bag End did nottake effect until midnight. But Lobelia can perhaps be for-given: she had been obliged to wait about seventy-seven yearslonger for Bag End than she once hoped, and she was now ahundred years old. Anyway, she had come to see that nothingshe had paid for had been carried off; and she wanted thekeys. It took a long while to satisfy her, as she had brought acomplete inventory with her and went right through it. In theend she departed with Lotho and the spare key and thepromise that the other key would be left at the Gamgees inBagshot Row. She snorted, and showed plainly that shethought the Gamgees capable of plundering the hole duringthe night. Frodo did not offer her any tea.He took his own tea with Pippin and Sam Gamgee in thekitchen. It had been ofcially announced that Sam wascoming to Buckland to do for Mr. Frodo and look after hisbit of garden; an arrangement that was approved by theGaffer, though it did not console him for the prospect ofhaving Lobelia as a neighbour.Our last meal at Bag End! said Frodo, pushing back hischair. They left the washing up for Lobelia. Pippin and Samstrapped up their three packs and piled them in the porch.Pippin went out for a last stroll in the garden. Sam dis-appeared.The sun went down. Bag End seemed sad and gloomy anddishevelled. Frodo wandered round the familiar rooms, andsaw the light of the sunset fade on the walls, and shadowscreep out of the corners. It grew slowly dark indoors. Hewent out and walked down to the gate at the bottom of thepath, and then on a short way down the Hill Road. He halfthree is company 91expected to see Gandalf come striding up through the dusk.The sky was clear and the stars were growing bright. Itsgoing to be a ne night, he said aloud. Thats good for abeginning. I feel like walking. I cant bear any more hangingabout. I am going to start, and Gandalf must follow me. Heturned to go back, and then stopped, for he heard voices, justround the corner by the end of Bagshot Row. One voice wascertainly the old Gaffers; the other was strange, and some-how unpleasant. He could not make out what it said, but heheard the Gaffers answers, which were rather shrill. The oldman seemed put out.No, Mr. Baggins has gone away. Went this morning, andmy Sam went with him: anyway all his stuff went. Yes, soldout and gone, I tellee. Why? Whys none of my business,or yours. Where to? That aint no secret. Hes moved toBucklebury or some such place, away down yonder. Yes it is a tidy way. Ive never been so far myself; theyre queer folksin Buckland. No, I cant give no message. Good night toyou!Footsteps went away down the Hill. Frodo wonderedvaguely why the fact that they did not come on up the Hillseemed a great relief. I am sick of questions and curiosityabout my doings, I suppose, he thought. What an inquisitivelot they all are! He had half a mind to go and ask the Gafferwho the inquirer was; but he thought better (or worse) of it,and turned and walked quickly back to Bag End.Pippin was sitting on his pack in the porch. Sam was notthere. Frodo stepped inside the dark door. Sam! he called.Sam! Time!Coming, sir! came the answer from far within, followedsoon by Sam himself, wiping his mouth. He had been sayingfarewell to the beer-barrel in the cellar.All aboard, Sam? said Frodo.Yes, sir. Ill last for a bit now, sir.Frodo shut and locked the round door, and gave the keyto Sam. Run down with this to your home, Sam! he said.Then cut along the Row and meet us as quick as you can at92 the fellowship of the ringthe gate in the lane beyond the meadows. We are not goingthrough the village tonight. Too many ears pricking and eyesprying. Sam ran off at full speed.Well, now were off at last! said Frodo. They shoulderedtheir packs and took up their sticks, and walked round thecorner to the west side of Bag End. Good-bye! said Frodo,looking at the dark blank windows. He waved his hand, andthen turned and (following Bilbo, if he had known it) hurriedafter Peregrin down the garden-path. They jumped over thelow place in the hedge at the bottom and took to the elds,passing into the darkness like a rustle in the grasses.At the bottom of the Hill on its western side they came tothe gate opening on to a narrow lane. There they halted andadjusted the straps of their packs. Presently Sam appeared,trotting quickly and breathing hard; his heavy pack washoisted high on his shoulders, and he had put on his head atall shapeless felt bag, which he called a hat. In the gloom helooked very much like a dwarf.I am sure you have given me all the heaviest stuff, saidFrodo. I pity snails, and all that carry their homes on theirbacks.I could take a lot more yet, sir. My packet is quite light,said Sam stoutly and untruthfully.No you dont, Sam! said Pippin. It is good for him. Hesgot nothing except what he ordered us to pack. Hes beenslack lately, and hell feel the weight less when hes walkedoff some of his own.Be kind to a poor old hobbit! laughed Frodo. I shall beas thin as a willow-wand, Im sure, before I get to Buckland.But I was talking nonsense. I suspect you have taken morethan your share, Sam, and I shall look into it at our nextpacking. He picked up his stick again. Well, we all likewalking in the dark, he said, so lets put some miles behindus before bed.For a short way they followed the lane westwards. Thenleaving it they turned left and took quietly to the elds again.three is company 93They went in single le along hedgerows and the borders ofcoppices, and night fell dark about them. In their dark cloaksthey were as invisible as if they all had magic rings. Sincethey were all hobbits, and were trying to be silent, they madeno noise that even hobbits would hear. Even the wild thingsin the elds and woods hardly noticed their passing.After some time they crossed the Water, west of Hobbiton,by a narrow plank-bridge. The stream was there no more thana winding black ribbon, bordered with leaning alder-trees. Amile or two further south they hastily crossed the great roadfrom the Brandywine Bridge; they were now in the Tooklandand bending south-eastwards they made for the Green HillCountry. As they began to climb its rst slopes they lookedback and saw the lamps in Hobbiton far off twinkling in thegentle valley of the Water. Soon it disappeared in the foldsof the darkened land, and was followed by Bywater beside itsgrey pool. When the light of the last farm was far behind,peeping among the trees, Frodo turned and waved a hand infarewell.I wonder if I shall ever look down into that valley again,he said quietly.When they had walked for about three hours they rested.The night was clear, cool, and starry, but smoke-like wispsof mist were creeping up the hill-sides from the streams anddeep meadows. Thin-clad birches, swaying in a light windabove their heads, made a black net against the pale sky.They ate a very frugal supper (for hobbits), and then wenton again. Soon they struck a narrow road, that went rollingup and down, fading grey into the darkness ahead: the roadto Woodhall, and Stock, and the Bucklebury Ferry. It climbedaway from the main road in the Water-valley, and woundover the skirts of the Green Hills towards Woody End, a wildcorner of the Eastfarthing.After a while they plunged into a deeply cloven trackbetween tall trees that rustled their dry leaves in the night. Itwas very dark. At rst they talked, or hummed a tune softlytogether, being now far away from inquisitive ears. Then they104 the fellowship of the ringSnow-white! Snow-white! O Lady clear!O Queen beyond the Western Seas!O Light to us that wander hereAmid the world of woven trees!Gilthoniel! O Elbereth!Clear are thy eyes and bright thy breath!Snow-white! Snow-white! We sing to theeIn a far land beyond the Sea.O stars that in the Sunless YearWith shining hand by her were sown,In windy elds now bright and clearWe see your silver blossom blown!O Elbereth! Gilthoniel!We still remember, we who dwellIn this far land beneath the trees,Thy starlight on the Western Seas.The song ended. These are High Elves! They spoke thename of Elbereth! said Frodo in amazement. Few of thatfairest folk are ever seen in the Shire. Not many now remainin Middle-earth, east of the Great Sea. This is indeed astrange chance!The hobbits sat in shadow by the wayside. Before long theElves came down the lane towards the valley. They passedslowly, and the hobbits could see the starlight glimmering ontheir hair and in their eyes. They bore no lights, yet as theywalked a shimmer, like the light of the moon above the rimof the hills before it rises, seemed to fall about their feet. Theywere now silent, and as the last Elf passed he turned andlooked towards the hobbits and laughed.Hail, Frodo! he cried. You are abroad late. Or are youperhaps lost? Then he called aloud to the others, and all thecompany stopped and gathered round.This is indeed wonderful! they said. Three hobbits in athree is company 105wood at night! We have not seen such a thing since Bilbowent away. What is the meaning of it?The meaning of it, fair people, said Frodo, is simply thatwe seem to be going the same way as you are. I like walkingunder the stars. But I would welcome your company.But we have no need of other company, and hobbits areso dull, they laughed. And how do you know that we go thesame way as you, for you do not know whither we are going?And how do you know my name? asked Frodo in return.We know many things, they said. We have seen youoften before with Bilbo, though you may not have seen us.Who are you, and who is your lord? asked Frodo.I am Gildor, answered their leader, the Elf who had rsthailed him. Gildor Inglorion of the House of Finrod. We areExiles, and most of our kindred have long ago departed andwe too are now only tarrying here a while, ere we return overthe Great Sea. But some of our kinsfolk dwell still in peacein Rivendell. Come now, Frodo, tell us what you are doing?For we see that there is some shadow of fear upon you.O Wise People! interrupted Pippin eagerly. Tell us aboutthe Black Riders!Black Riders? they said in low voices. Why do you askabout Black Riders?Because two Black Riders have overtaken us today, or onehas done so twice, said Pippin; only a little while ago heslipped away as you drew near.The Elves did not answer at once, but spoke together softlyin their own tongue. At length Gildor turned to the hobbits.We will not speak of this here, he said. We think you hadbest come now with us. It is not our custom, but for this timewe will take you on our road, and you shall lodge with ustonight, if you will.O Fair Folk! This is good fortune beyond my hope, saidPippin. Sam was speechless. I thank you indeed, GildorInglorion, said Frodo bowing. Elen sla lumenn omentielvo,a star shines on the hour of our meeting, he added in theHigh-elven speech.106 the fellowship of the ringBe careful, friends! cried Gildor laughing. Speak nosecrets! Here is a scholar in the Ancient Tongue. Bilbo wasa good master. Hail, Elf-friend! he said, bowing to Frodo.Come now with your friends and join our company! Youhad best walk in the middle so that you may not stray. Youmay be weary before we halt.Why? Where are you going? asked Frodo.For tonight we go to the woods on the hills above Wood-hall. It is some miles, but you shall have rest at the end of it,and it will shorten your journey tomorrow.They now marched on again in silence, and passed likeshadows and faint lights: for Elves (even more than hobbits)could walk when they wished without sound or footfall.Pippin soon began to feel sleepy, and staggered once or twice;but each time a tall Elf at his side put out his arm and savedhim from a fall. Sam walked along at Frodos side, as if in adream, with an expression on his face half of fear and half ofastonished joy.The woods on either side became denser; the trees werenow younger and thicker; and as the lane went lower, runningdown into a fold of the hills, there were many deep brakes ofhazel on the rising slopes at either hand. At last the Elvesturned aside from the path. A green ride lay almost unseenthrough the thickets on the right; and this they followed as itwound away back up the wooded slopes on to the top ofa shoulder of the hills that stood out into the lower landof the river-valley. Suddenly they came out of the shadowof the trees, and before them lay a wide space of grass,grey under the night. On three sides the woods pressedupon it; but eastward the ground fell steeply and the topsof the dark trees, growing at the bottom of the slope, werebelow their feet. Beyond, the low lands lay dim and atunder the stars. Nearer at hand a few lights twinkled in thevillage of Woodhall.The Elves sat on the grass and spoke together in soft voices;they seemed to take no further notice of the hobbits. Frodothree is company 107and his companions wrapped themselves in cloaks andblankets, and drowsiness stole over them. The night grew on,and the lights in the valley went out. Pippin fell asleep,pillowed on a green hillock.Away high in the East swung Remmirath, the Netted Stars,and slowly above the mists red Borgil rose, glowing like ajewel of re. Then by some shift of airs all the mist was drawnaway like a veil, and there leaned up, as he climbed over therim of the world, the Swordsman of the Sky, Menelvagorwith his shining belt. The Elves all burst into song. Suddenlyunder the trees a re sprang up with a red light.Come! the Elves called to the hobbits. Come! Now is thetime for speech and merriment!Pippin sat up and rubbed his eyes. He shivered. There isa re in the hall, and food for hungry guests, said an Elfstanding before him.At the south end of the greensward there was an opening.There the green oor ran on into the wood, and formed awide space like a hall, roofed by the boughs of trees. Theirgreat trunks ran like pillars down each side. In the middlethere was a wood-re blazing, and upon the tree-pillarstorches with lights of gold and silver were burning steadily.The Elves sat round the re upon the grass or upon the sawnrings of old trunks. Some went to and fro bearing cups andpouring drink; others brought food on heaped plates anddishes.This is poor fare, they said to the hobbits; for we arelodging in the greenwood far from our halls. If ever you areour guests at home, we will treat you better.It seems to me good enough for a birthday-party, saidFrodo.Pippin afterwards recalled little of either food or drink, forhis mind was lled with the light upon the elf-faces, and thesound of voices so various and so beautiful that he felt in awaking dream. But he remembered that there was bread,surpassing the savour of a fair white loaf to one who is starv-ing; and fruits sweet as wildberries and richer than the tended108 the fellowship of the ringfruits of gardens; he drained a cup that was lled with afragrant draught, cool as a clear fountain, golden as a summerafternoon.Sam could never describe in words, nor picture clearly tohimself, what he felt or thought that night, though it remainedin his memory as one of the chief events of his life. Thenearest he ever got was to say: Well, sir, if I could growapples like that, I would call myself a gardener. But it wasthe singing that went to my heart, if you know what I mean.Frodo sat, eating, drinking, and talking with delight; buthis mind was chiey on the words spoken. He knew a littleof the elf-speech and listened eagerly. Now and again hespoke to those that served him and thanked them in theirown language. They smiled at him and said laughing: Hereis a jewel among hobbits!After a while Pippin fell fast asleep, and was lifted up andborne away to a bower under the trees; there he was laidupon a soft bed and slept the rest of the night away. Samrefused to leave his master. When Pippin had gone, he cameand sat curled up at Frodos feet, where at last he noddedand closed his eyes. Frodo remained long awake, talking withGildor.They spoke of many things, old and new, and Frodo ques-tioned Gildor much about happenings in the wide worldoutside the Shire. The tidings were mostly sad and ominous:of gathering darkness, the wars of Men, and the ight of theElves. At last Frodo asked the question that was nearest tohis heart:Tell me, Gildor, have you ever seen Bilbo since he left us?Gildor smiled. Yes, he answered. Twice. He said farewellto us on this very spot. But I saw him once again, far fromhere. He would say no more about Bilbo, and Frodo fellsilent.You do not ask me or tell me much that concerns yourself,Frodo, said Gildor. But I already know a little, and I canread more in your face and in the thought behind your ques-three is company 109tions. You are leaving the Shire, and yet you doubt that youwill nd what you seek, or accomplish what you intend, orthat you will ever return. Is not that so?It is, said Frodo; but I thought my going was a secretknown only to Gandalf and my faithful Sam. He lookeddown at Sam, who was snoring gently.The secret will not reach the Enemy from us, said Gildor.The Enemy? said Frodo. Then you know why I amleaving the Shire?I do not know for what reason the Enemy is pursuingyou, answered Gildor; but I perceive that he is  strangeindeed though that seems to me. And I warn you that perilis now both before you and behind you, and upon eitherside.You mean the Riders? I feared that they were servants ofthe Enemy. What are the Black Riders?Has Gandalf told you nothing?Nothing about such creatures.Then I think it is not for me to say more  lest terrorshould keep you from your journey. For it seems to me thatyou have set out only just in time, if indeed you are in time.You must now make haste, and neither stay nor turn back;for the Shire is no longer any protection to you.I cannot imagine what information could be more terrify-ing than your hints and warnings, exclaimed Frodo. I knewthat danger lay ahead, of course; but I did not expect to meetit in our own Shire. Cant a hobbit walk from the Water tothe River in peace?But it is not your own Shire, said Gildor. Others dwelthere before hobbits were; and others will dwell here againwhen hobbits are no more. The wide world is all about you:you can fence yourselves in, but you cannot for ever fenceit out.I know  and yet it has always seemed so safe and familiar.What can I do now? My plan was to leave the Shire secretly,and make my way to Rivendell; but now my footsteps aredogged, before ever I get to Buckland.110 the fellowship of the ringI think you should still follow that plan, said Gildor. I donot think the Road will prove too hard for your courage. Butif you desire clearer counsel, you should ask Gandalf. I donot know the reason for your ight, and therefore I do notknow by what means your pursuers will assail you. Thesethings Gandalf must know. I suppose that you will see himbefore you leave the Shire?I hope so. But that is another thing that makes me anxious.I have been expecting Gandalf for many days. He was tohave come to Hobbiton at the latest two nights ago; but hehas never appeared. Now I am wondering what can havehappened. Should I wait for him?Gildor was silent for a moment. I do not like this news,he said at last. That Gandalf should be late, does not bodewell. But it is said: Do not meddle in the affairs of Wizards, forthey are subtle and quick to anger. The choice is yours: to goor wait.And it is also said, answered Frodo: Go not to the Elvesfor counsel, for they will say both no and yes.Is it indeed? laughed Gildor. Elves seldom give un-guarded advice, for advice is a dangerous gift, even from thewise to the wise, and all courses may run ill. But what wouldyou? You have not told me all concerning yourself; and howthen shall I choose better than you? But if you demand advice,I will for friendships sake give it. I think you should nowgo at once, without delay; and if Gandalf does not comebefore you set out, then I also advise this: do not go alone.Take such friends as are trusty and willing. Now you shouldbe grateful, for I do not give this counsel gladly. The Elveshave their own labours and their own sorrows, and they arelittle concerned with the ways of hobbits, or of any othercreatures upon earth. Our paths cross theirs seldom, bychance or purpose. In this meeting there may be more thanchance; but the purpose is not clear to me, and I fear to saytoo much.I am deeply grateful, said Frodo; but I wish you wouldtell me plainly what the Black Riders are. If I take your advicethree is company 111I may not see Gandalf for a long while, and I ought to knowwhat is the danger that pursues me.Is it not enough to know that they are servants of theEnemy? answered Gildor. Flee them! Speak no words tothem! They are deadly. Ask no more of me! But my heartforbodes that, ere all is ended, you, Frodo son of Drogo, willknow more of these fell things than Gildor Inglorion. MayElbereth protect you!But where shall I nd courage? asked Frodo. That iswhat I chiey need.Courage is found in unlikely places, said Gildor. Be ofgood hope! Sleep now! In the morning we shall have gone; butwe will send our messages through the lands. The WanderingCompanies shall know of your journey, and those that havepower for good shall be on the watch. I name you Elf-friend;and may the stars shine upon the end of your road! Seldomhave we had such delight in strangers, and it is fair to hearwords of the Ancient Speech from the lips of other wanderersin the world.Frodo felt sleep coming upon him, even as Gildor nishedspeaking. I will sleep now, he said; and the Elf led him to abower beside Pippin, and he threw himself upon a bed andfell at once into a dreamless slumberChapter 5A CONSPIRACY UNMASKEDNow we had better get home ourselves, said Merry. Theressomething funny about all this, I see; but it must wait till weget in.They turned down the Ferry lane, which was straight andwell-kept and edged with large white-washed stones. In ahundred yards or so it brought them to the river-bank, wherethere was a broad wooden landing-stage. A large at ferry-boat was moored beside it. The white bollards near thewaters edge glimmered in the light of two lamps on highposts. Behind them the mists in the at elds were now abovethe hedges; but the water before them was dark, with only afew curling wisps like steam among the reeds by the bank.There seemed to be less fog on the further side.Merry led the pony over a gangway on to the ferry, andthe others followed. Merry then pushed slowly off with a longpole. The Brandywine owed slow and broad before them.On the other side the bank was steep, and up it a windingpath climbed from the further landing. Lamps were twinklingthere. Behind loomed up the Buck Hill; and out of it, throughstray shrouds of mist, shone many round windows, yellowand red. They were the windows of Brandy Hall, the ancienthome of the Brandybucks.Long ago Gorhendad Oldbuck, head of the Oldbuckfamily, one of the oldest in the Marish or indeed in the Shire,had crossed the river, which was the original boundary ofthe land eastwards. He built (and excavated) Brandy Hall,changed his name to Brandybuck, and settled down tobecome master of what was virtually a small independentcountry. His family grew and grew, and after his days con-a conspiracy unmasked 129tinued to grow, until Brandy Hall occupied the whole of thelow hill, and had three large front-doors, many side-doors,and about a hundred windows. The Brandybucks and theirnumerous dependants then began to burrow, and later tobuild, all round about. That was the origin of Buckland, athickly inhabited strip between the river and the Old Forest, asort of colony from the Shire. Its chief village was Bucklebury,clustering in the banks and slopes behind Brandy Hall.The people in the Marish were friendly with the Buck-landers, and the authority of the Master of the Hall (as thehead of the Brandybuck family was called) was still acknowl-edged by the farmers between Stock and Rushey. But mostof the folk of the old Shire regarded the Bucklanders aspeculiar, half foreigners as it were. Though, as a matter offact, they were not very different from the other hobbitsof the Four Farthings. Except in one point: they were fondof boats, and some of them could swim.Their land was originally unprotected from the East; buton that side they had built a hedge: the High Hay. It hadbeen planted many generations ago, and was now thick andtall, for it was constantly tended. It ran all the way fromBrandywine Bridge, in a big loop curving away from theriver, to Haysend (where the Withywindle owed out of theForest into the Brandywine): well over twenty miles from endto end. But, of course, it was not a complete protection.The Forest drew close to the hedge in many places. TheBucklanders kept their doors locked after dark, and that alsowas not usual in the Shire.The ferry-boat moved slowly across the water. The Buck-land shore drew nearer. Sam was the only member of theparty who had not been over the river before. He had astrange feeling as the slow gurgling stream slipped by: his oldlife lay behind in the mists, dark adventure lay in front. Hescratched his head, and for a moment had a passing wish thatMr. Frodo could have gone on living quietly at Bag End.The four hobbits stepped off the ferry. Merry was tying it130 the fellowship of the ringup, and Pippin was already leading the pony up the path,when Sam (who had been looking back, as if to take farewellof the Shire) said in a hoarse whisper:Look back, Mr. Frodo! Do you see anything?On the far stage, under the distant lamps, they could justmake out a gure: it looked like a dark black bundle leftbehind. But as they looked it seemed to move and sway thisway and that, as if searching the ground. It then crawled, orwent crouching, back into the gloom beyond the lamps.What in the Shire is that? exclaimed Merry.Something that is following us, said Frodo. But dont askany more now! Lets get away at once! They hurried up thepath to the top of the bank, but when they looked back thefar shore was shrouded in mist, and nothing could be seen.Thank goodness you dont keep any boats on the west-bank! said Frodo. Can horses cross the river?They can go ten miles north to Brandywine Bridge  orthey might swim, answered Merry. Though I never heardof any horse swimming the Brandywine. But what havehorses to do with it?Ill tell you later. Lets get indoors and then we can talk.All right! You and Pippin know your way; so Ill just rideon and tell Fatty Bolger that you are coming. Well see aboutsupper and things.We had our supper early with Farmer Maggot, saidFrodo; but we could do with another.You shall have it! Give me that basket! said Merry, androde ahead into the darkness.It was some distance from the Brandywine to Frodos newhouse at Crickhollow. They passed Buck Hill and BrandyHall on their left, and on the outskirts of Bucklebury struckthe main road of Buckland that ran south from the Bridge.Half a mile northward along this they came to a lane openingon their right. This they followed for a couple of miles as itclimbed up and down into the country.At last they came to a narrow gate in a thick hedge. Nothinga conspiracy unmasked 131could be seen of the house in the dark: it stood back fromthe lane in the middle of a wide circle of lawn surrounded bya belt of low trees inside the outer hedge. Frodo had chosenit, because it stood in an out-of-the-way corner of thecountry, and there were no other dwellings close by. Youcould get in and out without being noticed. It had been builta long while before by the Brandybucks, for the use of guests,or members of the family that wished to escape from thecrowded life of Brandy Hall for a time. It was an old-fashioned countried house, as much like a hobbit-hole aspossible: it was long and low, with no upper storey; and ithad a roof of turf, round windows, and a large round door.As they walked up the green path from the gate no lightwas visible; the windows were dark and shuttered. Frodoknocked on the door, and Fatty Bolger opened it. A friendlylight streamed out. They slipped in quickly and shut them-selves and the light inside. They were in a wide hall withdoors on either side; in front of them a passage ran backdown the middle of the house.Well, what do you think of it? asked Merry coming upthe passage. We have done our best in a short time to makeit look like home. After all Fatty and I only got here with thelast cart-load yesterday.Frodo looked round. It did look like home. Many of hisown favourite things  or Bilbos things (they reminded himsharply of him in their new setting)  were arranged as nearlyas possible as they had been at Bag End. It was a pleasant,comfortable, welcoming place; and he found himself wishingthat he was really coming here to settle down in quiet retire-ment. It seemed unfair to have put his friends to all thistrouble; and he wondered again how he was going to breakthe news to them that he must leave them so soon, indeed atonce. Yet that would have to be done that very night, beforethey all went to bed.Its delightful! he said with an effort. I hardly feel that Ihave moved at all.* * *132 the fellowship of the ringThe travellers hung up their cloaks, and piled their packs onthe oor. Merry led them down the passage and threw open adoor at the far end. Firelight came out, and a puff of steam.A bath! cried Pippin. O blessed Meriadoc!Which order shall we go in? said Frodo. Eldest rst, orquickest rst? Youll be last either way, Master Peregrin.Trust me to arrange things better than that! said Merry.We cant begin life at Crickhollow with a quarrel over baths.In that room there are three tubs, and a copper full of boilingwater. There are also towels, mats and soap. Get inside, andbe quick!Merry and Fatty went into the kitchen on the other side ofthe passage, and busied themselves with the nal preparationsfor a late supper. Snatches of competing songs came fromthe bathroom mixed with the sound of splashing and wallow-ing. The voice of Pippin was suddenly lifted up above theothers in one of Bilbos favourite bath-songs.Sing hey! for the bath at close of daythat washes the weary mud away!A loon is he that will not sing:O! Water Hot is a noble thing!O! Sweet is the sound of falling rain,and the brook that leaps from hill to plain;but better than rain or rippling streamsis Water Hot that smokes and steams.O! Water cold we may pour at needdown a thirsty throat and be glad indeed;but better is Beer, if drink we lack,and Water Hot poured down the back.O! Water is fair that leaps on highin a fountain white beneath the sky;but never did fountain sound so sweetas splashing Hot Water with my feet!a conspiracy unmasked 133There was a terric splash, and a shout of Whoa! fromFrodo. It appeared that a lot of Pippins bath had imitated afountain and leaped on high.Merry went to the door: What about supper and beer inthe throat? he called. Frodo came out drying his hair.Theres so much water in the air that Im coming into thekitchen to nish, he said.Lawks! said Merry, looking in. The stone oor was swim-ming. You ought to mop all that up before you get anythingto eat, Peregrin, he said. Hurry up, or we shant wait for you.They had supper in the kitchen on a table near the re.I suppose you three wont want mushrooms again? saidFredegar without much hope.Yes we shall! cried Pippin.Theyre mine! said Frodo. Given to me by Mrs. Maggot,a queen among farmers wives. Take your greedy handsaway, and Ill serve them.Hobbits have a passion for mushrooms, surpassing eventhe greediest likings of Big People. A fact which partlyexplains young Frodos long expeditions to the renownedelds of the Marish, and the wrath of the injured Maggot.On this occasion there was plenty for all, even according tohobbit standards. There were also many other things to fol-low, and when they had nished even Fatty Bolger heaved asigh of content. They pushed back the table, and drew chairsround the re.Well clear up later, said Merry. Now tell me all about it!I guess that you have been having adventures, which was notquite fair without me. I want a full account; and most of allI want to know what was the matter with old Maggot, andwhy he spoke to me like that. He sounded almost as if he wasscared, if that is possible.We have all been scared, said Pippin after a pause, inwhich Frodo stared at the re and did not speak. You wouldhave been, too, if you had been chased for two days by BlackRiders.134 the fellowship of the ringAnd what are they?Black gures riding on black horses, answered Pippin. IfFrodo wont talk, I will tell you the whole tale from thebeginning. He then gave a full account of their journey fromthe time when they left Hobbiton. Sam gave various support-ing nods and exclamations. Frodo remained silent.I should think you were making it all up, said Merry, ifI had not seen that black shape on the landing-stage  andheard the queer sound in Maggots voice. What do you makeof it all, Frodo?Cousin Frodo has been very close, said Pippin. But thetime has come for him to open out. So far we have beengiven nothing more to go on than Farmer Maggots guessthat it has something to do with old Bilbos treasure.That was only a guess, said Frodo hastily. Maggot doesnot know anything.Old Maggot is a shrewd fellow, said Merry. A lot goeson behind his round face that does not come out in his talk.Ive heard that he used to go into the Old Forest at one time,and he has the reputation of knowing a good many strangethings. But you can at least tell us, Frodo, whether you thinkhis guess good or bad.I think, answered Frodo slowly, that it was a good guess,as far as it goes. There is a connexion with Bilbos old adven-tures, and the Riders are looking, or perhaps one ought tosay searching, for him or for me. I also fear, if you want toknow, that it is no joke at all; and that I am not safe here oranywhere else. He looked round at the windows and walls,as if he was afraid they would suddenly give way. The otherslooked at him in silence, and exchanged meaning glancesamong themselves.Its coming out in a minute, whispered Pippin to Merry.Merry nodded.Well! said Frodo at last, sitting up and straightening hisback, as if he had made a decision. I cant keep it dark anylonger. I have got something to tell you all. But I dont knowquite how to begin.a conspiracy unmasked 135I think I could help you, said Merry quietly, by tellingyou some of it myself.What do you mean? said Frodo, looking at him anxiously.Just this, my dear old Frodo: you are miserable, becauseyou dont know how to say good-bye. You meant to leave theShire, of course. But danger has come on you sooner than youexpected, and now you are making up your mind to go at once.And you dont want to. We are very sorry for you.Frodo opened his mouth and shut it again. His look ofsurprise was so comical that they laughed. Dear old Frodo!said Pippin. Did you really think you had thrown dust in allour eyes? You have not been nearly careful or clever enoughfor that! You have obviously been planning to go and sayingfarewell to all your haunts all this year since April. We haveconstantly heard you muttering: Shall I ever look downinto that valley again, I wonder, and things like that. Andpretending that you had come to the end of your money, andactually selling your beloved Bag End to those Sackville-Bagginses! And all those close talks with Gandalf.Good heavens! said Frodo. I thought I had been bothcareful and clever. I dont know what Gandalf would say. Isall the Shire discussing my departure then?Oh no! said Merry. Dont worry about that! The secretwont keep for long, of course; but at present it is, I think,only known to us conspirators. After all, you must rememberthat we know you well, and are often with you. We canusually guess what you are thinking. I knew Bilbo, too. Totell you the truth, I have been watching you rather closelyever since he left. I thought you would go after him sooneror later; indeed I expected you to go sooner, and lately wehave been very anxious. We have been terried that youmight give us the slip, and go off suddenly, all on your ownlike he did. Ever since this spring we have kept our eyes open,and done a good deal of planning on our own account. Youare not going to escape so easily!But I must go, said Frodo. It cannot be helped, dearfriends. It is wretched for us all, but it is no use your trying